are all evils caused by insufficient
knowledge all evils are caused by
insufficient knowledge is what david
deutsch has called the principle of
optimism
a reason this is called the principle of
optimism is that it means that whatever
is going wrong whatever the evil thing
is whatever we no longer want or do want
but don't have is just due to some lack
of knowledge in other words ignorance on
our part
if we try to create knowledge seek
solutions and search for answers then
with an effort sometimes great effort we
can find them
logically this is simply equivalent to
problems are soluble but there is some
confusion i think following deeply
entrenched traditional religious memes
about how evil should imply intent this
too is a moral claim of course about how
words should be used i guess the idea
evil must entail intent comes from the
idea that there was once considered to
be anger of the gods or other beings so
natural disasters have traditionally
been interpreted in the pre-scientific
era as evidence of the god's anger
when we learned lightning was just
static electricity sparking we regarded
there as being no intent so god's anger
or perhaps the anger of demons or
whatever was not there so how can
lightning be an evil even about atheists
inherit this way of speaking and
thinking to some extent
evil can only be evil if there is intent
as solzhenitsyn wrote quote the line
dividing good and evil cuts through the
heart of every human being this can be
interpreted in a number of ways here's
two of them
firstly
there are mystical type forces satan vs
yahweh say or even just psychological
forces pulling the soul or mind in one
direction or the other
or secondly
people possess genuine knowledge the
good and far more ignorance sometimes
bad and the latter can cause real
suffering
people can also sometimes know what just
isn't so and that's a form of ignorance
which can also cause suffering of an
even worse kind
the first force type way of thinking
can be a useful way of framing things
but it can also mislead one into
thinking that all evil actions must be
motivated by evil intent but they need
not be even if evil philosophies dogmas
of all kinds can act very much like
psychological forces but there too a
person is a victim as much as they are
an active agent
their intents are shaped very much by
ideas they learned on mother's knee and
for which they only have partial
responsibility because they are only
dimly consciously aware of them many
ideas are unconscious or inexplicit and
if one doesn't know one even has an idea
which is directing one's behavior to
what extent is one responsible for that
idea it is often just rank ignorance
that causes a person to commit an evil
act people can intend great good have
the best of intentions and yet they are
so profoundly ignorant and mistaken they
cause the worst kinds of suffering it's
been well documented that certain kinds
of suicide bombers apparently feel
nothing but positive emotions of joy
ecstasy and elation even if these
emotions aren't actually positive in any
ultimate sense the intentions of these
people are said to be good they'll send
their victims to heaven to eternal
paradise where they can eventually be
reunited with everyone they love
so do such people have evil intents well
on the one hand clearly not they are
motivated on some accounts by deep love
as perverse as this may seem but it's
evil nonetheless
their intentions don't matter to the
evil of the matter at hand intention
does of course make an important
difference in a legal sense though i
might personally disagree with some of
what the legal system has to say about
this for example that mental illness is
a defense because the intentions were
different but this is beside the point
for now
there is a clear difference between
accidentally knocking someone into
traffic and deliberately pushing them
their intent is everything in either
case a civilized legal system shows
compassion but in the former where it's
an accident it might very well result in
no jail time at all while in the latter
a deliberate pushing of someone into
traffic
should probably result in a person being
locked up until a very good explanation
is known about whether one is predicted
to do that sort of thing again
i personally recall quite vividly having
a thought myself at around about the age
of eight when i was in catholic church
hearing about all the ways we might end
up in hell and how salvation might come
through baptism
i reasoned myself into what i thought
was the best possible thing that could
be done for the newly baptized
swift of death
indeed what would god think i wanted if
someone took an angel of death kind of
position and went around quickly
murdering anyone newly baptized so they
went straight to heaven and didn't have
the opportunity to sin and therefore end
up in hell
and what if this angel of death that
went around murdering people who were
baptized what if their thoughts were
well even if i personally get sent to
hell for all of this murdering i feel
it's worth it because i've saved so many
souls wouldn't god look favorably on
such a serial killer wouldn't that be
almost like what jesus would do
self-sacrificed
in order to save the souls of so many
others why don't well-meaning true
believers just murder babies straight
after their baptism why don't loving
parents are they selfish after all
babies are necessarily innocent and will
go straight to heaven once the original
sin had been removed
i personally at that age couldn't find a
logical loophole
and to be honest today i still cannot
except that i've relinquished much of
the religious mindset my point here is
that intention can be for the greatest
good
even though
terrible suffering evil follows
and why
because it's the ignorance that makes
the difference here a serious lack of
knowledge about reality there is no
supernatural heaven and no god to reward
such an angel of death but if one
remains unconsciously in a religious
mindset one thinks evil necessarily has
to be about intention
one might say a person has evil intent
and only people can be evil and so on in
reality let's just observe that the
typical evil genocidal dictator seems to
think they too are doing good by
purifying the world they have in their
mind good intentions of course we see
their behaviour as abominable i think it
more parsimonious to just say problems
can be an evil a hazard a real threat to
life liberty and the pursuit or
actualization of happiness but if one
insists only people can truly be evil
very well
the terminology doesn't matter to the
principle of optimism which runs deeper
than whether we use the word evil or
something else lightening that strikes
an innocent child is we must admit a bad
thing what is a bad thing a problem in
particular a problem that causes some
kind of suffering rather than one which
elicits joy a bad thing is an evil thing
it doesn't really matter what words you
use i like david deutsch's formulation
of evils are due to insufficient
knowledge i think that's quite right and
it follows in a lineage of usage of that
word that tries to capture something of
its fundamental relevance to morality
and of course illustrates therefore a
deep connection between what might have
been here the two thought of as the
separate domains of morality and
epistemology but if some people would
rather just say bad stuff is caused by
insufficient knowledge or just problems
we'd rather not have are caused by
insufficient knowledge or even suffering
is caused by insufficient knowledge then
so be it it seems that these are just
logically equivalent ways of saying the
same thing all bad things from murderous
intentions to murder itself from traffic
jams to jamming fingers and doors from
earthquakes to being hit in the head
with rakes from falling down stairs to
attacks by bears and solar flares these
are all bad things and all are caused by
our lack of knowledge if we know how to
prevent people having murderous
intentions we should prevent them if we
can find the knowledge needed to predict
and stop earthquakes or mitigate their
destruction to zero we would and should
if we could it all means the same stuff
i'll continue to call these things evils
of course an earthquake has no intent as
such it's not motivated twisting a
mustache and concocting plans about how
to hurt lots of people it literally
feels nothing pan psychists aside but
then apparently nor does a psychopath
feel anything or rather anything but joy
although i'm not convinced about this
and once more this highlights other
kinds of approaches to morality and
epistemology that call themselves
objective but in fact fall back into
subjectivity they fall back into what's
going on in your mind and how does a
person feel kinds of thinking that
objectivism is at heart subjectivists
for that reason actual objective
morality and epistemology says
feelings are not the criterion private
thoughts are not the criterion what
matters is what goes on out there in the
real ontologically objective world are
problems being solved or not are they
being exacerbated or not problems being
solved that's good and being exacerbated
that's an evil why would problems be
exacerbated because someone somewhere
perhaps everyone is lacking sufficient
knowledge periodically in australia many
lives and homes are lost in bushfires or
forest fires one reason is that very
well-meaning people do not want
so-called back burning to occur the
reduction of fuel in the forest in the
bush the pre-emptive burning of forest
and undergrowth around people's homes
well-meaning people don't want the
environment hurt others didn't want
people hurt from the smoke coming from
the back burning no one really intends
and no one can really foresee
huge bushfires across australia
bushfires exacerbated by insufficient
knowledge and the death and destruction
that occurs periodically with these
fires is a real evil and no one really
intends evil modulo arsonists but again
many of those are children ignorant
about the possibilities and others even
more ignorant than that evil isn't a
parochial property of individual minds
although it can be that
it's just a problem that causes
suffering and natural disasters on this
view are an evil to be solved or they're
just bad things i don't mind what you
call them
post script earlier in this piece i say
that the intentions of people are good
and the example i use is that the
intentions of certain kinds of suicide
bombers might be thought of as good they
want to send their victims to heaven
when i say that their intentions are
good i'm merely conceding the way the
words intention and good are often used
namely if one feels one is intending to
do good then on this view
one really is intending to do good
but
there's a philosophical subtlety here
one can intend to do good and yet still
have bad intentions
let me explain
this is the difference between
subjectivist morality and objective
morality
on the former thesis the subjective
things are good to the extent that
people think they are it might be you
yourself in your own life or it could be
a kind of consensus our greatest good
argument
on the subjectivist view it's about
feelings and or personal psychological
states including states sometimes
referred to as beliefs so if you really
truly believe or feel that you're trying
to do good then in some sense you are on
this view
but on the objectivist view that's all
mistaken it doesn't matter how you feel
it matters what happens in the world by
the measure of
are problems being solved or not now on
that view your intention doesn't matter
a jot your intention can be utterly
mistaken moreover because morality isn't
about personal psychological states we
also do not condemn a person for that
personal psychological state that was
mistaken we simply correct them error is
the natural near ubiquitous state of
things and all of us are as popper said
equal in our infinite ignorance
so a person who intends to do good our
proverbial suicide bomber thinking they
are sending those murdered souls to
heaven
has an objectively evil intent
their own feelings on the matter don't
matter murdering innocents destroys the
many means of error correction namely
people and that halts progress in some
ways and slows it in many ways and
creates all kinds of terrible problems
while solving none
that is an objective state of affairs
having nothing whatsoever to do with the
feelings beliefs and other private
psychological states of the people
involved
we can talk about suffering as a problem
even a painful one and the solution of
it without ever worrying about receptors
in the brain or in abstract moral terms
being concerned about how it feels or
why it's unpleasant we just recognize
it's a problem that needs solving and
compassion for others and fast progress
in this domain depends on us not getting
hung up about who feels what exactly and
why
the application of criticism to creative
solutions about the problems that harm
us most depends on us soberly and
rationally applying reason everything
else is either going to slow us down or
cause us to lose focus on finding the
solution
[Music]
you